One of the greatest illusions in life is continuity.
66 million years ago, the continuity of the dinosaurs had been going on for around
165 million years already, and it didn't seem this would change anytime soon.
The world was warm and pleasant, and most of the land was covered with lush forests
and an incredible diversity of trees, flowers, ferns, and trillions of critters.
Dinosaurs were ubiquitous and had diversified into hundreds of species of all shapes and sizes.
Titanosaurs, large gentle giants, shared the world with famous beasts like Tyrannosaurus rex
or Edmontosaurus. Pectinodon hunted in the undergrowth,
while Edmontosaurus wandered coastlines and swamps.
An ancient paradise, a world of plenty, full of life.
66 million years ago, maybe on a Tuesday afternoon, life was the same as it had been
the day before, or a thousand years before, or pretty much a million years before.
Things were good for our feathered dinosaur buddies, until a tiny, tiny detail in the sky changed.
If there were dinosaurs watching the stars, one night they may have noticed the appearance
of a new star, a tiny dot that for many weeks slowly became bigger and brighter.
Until one fateful day, it looked like another, small moon in the night sky.
And then, it faded from sight as it dipped into Earth's shadow.
For a few more hours, the illusion of continuity was upheld, until it was not anymore.
In the morning, the object suddenly appears again, now almost as large as the sun in the sky and
growing every moment, heading for the coast near the Yucatan Peninsula.
It takes the asteroid only seconds to pass through the thin layer between
space and the ground to make contact, as it enters the atmosphere at almost
60 times the speed of sound. Let's stop time.
Here, we see the unnamed asteroid about to commit specieside. Larger than Mount Everest,
it reaches from the ocean high into the atmosphere, higher than passenger planes
would fly millions of years later. At this moment, the world was one way.
In a fraction of a second, it would be fundamentally different.
Let's make the transition. As the asteroid hits the shallow
ocean and the bedrock below, the energy of billions of nuclear weapons is released all
at once as the asteroid vaporizes. A flash of light illuminates the sky
as an eerie bright white sphere grows over the Gulf of Mexico.
Bedrock melts into seething hot plasma at tens of thousands of degrees Celsius.
The thermal radiation from the explosion travels at the speed of light and immediately burns
everything within a radius of about 1,500 kilometers, while the energy from the impact
pushes so hard against Earth's crust that it loses all strength and flows away from the impact site
like a liquid, creating a hole 25 kilometers deep and 100 kilometers wide.
The ocean is pushed back for hundreds of kilometers, like when a kid jumps into a puddle.
As the crust bounces back, melted and flowing crust forms a temporary mountain,
stretching 10 kilometers into the sky. An incredible amount of material is
blasted into the higher atmosphere, or even out into space, as much as 60 times
the original mass of the asteroid. The violence of the strike is felt
everywhere on Earth within minutes. A magnitude 11 earthquake may be the
most powerful quake any living thing has ever witnessed in billions of years.
It is so insanely strong that in India it might have shaken gigantic lava fields and causes
volcanic eruptions that would last for 30,000 years and cover half of the Indian subcontinent
with lava. Even on the side of Earth opposite the impact, the ground still moved by several meters.
Nobody would sleep through this day. The gigantic explosion crashes against the
atmosphere with unprecedented violence and causes a shockwave that reaches speeds of more than 1,000
kilometers per hour near the site of impact, similar to the hyper hurricanes on gas giants
like Neptune. In middle America, basically any soil, vegetation, or animal is just shredded
into pieces and catapulted thousands of kilometers away. Now the previously displaced
oceans return. As the temporary mountain at the site of impact collapses, a ring of tsunamis as
high as one kilometer, enough to cover all skyscrapers humans would ever build, heads in
all directions. As they crash into the coasts of the continents surrounding the impact, they will
drown thousands of kilometers of coastline. 15 hours later, some of the waves that get
refracted around South America will still tower as much as 100 meters into the sky.
But we still haven't talked about the worst thing yet. A lot of the debris yeeted into space will
orbit Earth for thousands of years. Some may hit the moon or even Mars. But most of it comes right
back. When things fall through the atmosphere at such speeds, they get very hot, as in hundreds of
degrees hot. And this happens to millions of tons of material everywhere. This rapidly heats up the
atmosphere to insane temperatures. We don't know exactly how hot it got or how long this heat shock
lasted. But there are two ideas here. Either the air was heated to hundreds of degrees for a few
minutes, or 2000s of degrees for around one minute. In any case, the air became as hot as the
inside of an industrial oven. How bad the global effects of this were is contested. But if enough
heat reached the surface, a lot of plants and animals would have died very quickly if they
couldn't bury themselves or escape into caves. The heat together with raining debris also may have
ignited material on forest floors and sparked wildfires as the Earth rotated under the searing
hot plume. In a few hours, massive wildfires were probably burning around the globe. Some of them
may have lasted for months and turned Earth into a horrifying, hot, hellish version of itself.
As the day of the impact draws to an end, many of the dinosaurs are already dead, but the worst is
still to come. The gigantic plume of vaporized material reaches the upper atmosphere and spreads
around the whole globe. Together with the soot from the burning planet and the aerosols generated
at impact, the planet sinks into a deep darkness, with only the remaining raging fires illuminating
the scenery. Whatever plants survive the firestorms will now be starved for sunlight, as global
photosynthesis is temporarily shut down. Within days, temperatures crash as much as 25 degrees Celsius.
The oceans were especially hard hit. The lack of sunlight killed over 90 percent of plankton,
which formed the basis of the food web of marine life. Ultimately, this would kill off the large
marine reptiles and ammonites that used to dominate the seas. The biosphere that survivors
now find themselves in is like an alien landscape. Ash, debris, and the burned remains of the formerly
lush and blooming life cover the ground. The sky is dark and it's cold and fresh food is scarce,
while fungi thrive. For months and years, the planet will be a hostile and deadly place.
The sudden global winter will last for decades. At least 75 percent of all species on earth
will just vanish from existence. And so, as the day ends, the world is suddenly different.
The continuity that went on for millions of years is no more. The era of the dinosaurs is over.
Just like that. Eventually, from the ashes of the old world, survivors emerged. Birds that are the
direct descendants of the dinosaurs and mammals that would eventually become the dominant animals
on the planet. Without the asteroid, who knows what life on earth would look like today? Without
the sudden disruption of dinosaur continuity that completely changed the planet and all life on it,
we might have never had the opportunity to become what we are today.
It's not clear how long the human era will last. So far, modern humans have been around for 0.1
percent of the time the dinosaurs were. And in this short amount of time, we've achieved
impressive feats. From making the world our own, to reaching space and splitting the atom. Yet,
our future and our long-term survival are not a given. If we're not careful, it could end in an
instant, like the age of the dinosaurs ended. But in contrast to them, we know that our continuity
is fragile, even if it doesn't feel like it. We can be prepared and be vigilant and hopeful.
If we're lucky, our journey will go on for a long, long time.
Speaking of journeys, we want to address something in the spirit of transparency.
Quadska's art has changed in the last two years. We've become more than a YouTube channel or
animation studio and now also run a paper shop that sells hundreds of thousands of calendars,
posters and notebooks. That's not a happy accident, many of us have a background in graphic design.
Paper products are our roots and we actually started out creating posters,
books and print infographics. We love that you can touch them, smell them,
nerd about small details and printing techniques. Just like the channel, we started small and
without great ambition. Step by step, we found the right printers and papers, learned about shipping
and expanded our shop. We put a huge amount of research, love and hours into it, because this
is the only way we know how to do things. We don't just want to make generic merch,
we want to make things that fit our mission of making science exciting and creating beautiful
things. Things that persist and are made with high quality and love. Our shop gives us another outlet
to do this and as a nice side effect has turned into our main source of income for everything we
do on this channel, which also keeps us independent and our videos free for everyone. So we want to
build further on that and create more things that last. We've just started a new notebook line
called Pocket Log that we'll expand on in the future. The first edition is a dinosaur themed
collection that will hopefully serve a future paleontologist well. There are loads of plans
for sciency stuff, more journals and calendars and infographics. Let us know what you would like us to
make for your room, kids, classrooms and yourself. In the end, the things we do work because you like
them and because you enable us to put thousands of hours into videos and hundreds of hours into
posters and journals. Thank you so much for that. We're looking forward to making fun sciency stuff
for you, no matter if it's a video, a poster or something else entirely. Thank you for watching.